Partial least squares (PLS) is a practical algorithm for regression when modeling high-dimensional data that includes high collinearity. PLS was developed in the mid-20th century by the econometrician Herman Wold and subsequently widely adopted as a tool for the quantitative analysis of compounds in chemistry. PLS has the capacity for high predictive accuracy as it decomposes the matrix of predictor and response values into two separate blocks. These separate blocks represent latent factors or components that most account for the variation within the data. This process is guided by an inner relation between predictor scores, response scores, and regression coefficient that assures each decomposition of components maximizes its relationship to the response variable and includes information from the previous component. The model then normally uses a lower dimensional subspace of the design matrix to predict future response values, a projection of the latent structure. This gives the PLS high predictive capacity but lower ability for interpretation of components and therefore important variables. In this report, PLS is used to model housing data from Ames, Iowa which incorporates several predictors of different housing attributes to predict home price. Comparison of PLS to principal component regression (PCR), and ordinary least squares (OLS) is done. Simulated data that includes more predictors than observations and high collinearity are produced and latent components are recovered using PLS to allow for prediction. Finally, optimization of the algorithm is demonstrated using just-in-time programming and efficient functional and memory technique.
